## Code

[`is_palindrome` implementation strategies]({% link notes/palindromes.md %})

## Static and dynamic

* A **static** view of a program is derived its written representation – what can you tell without running it.
* A **dynamic** view of a program is derived from its runtime behavior.

## Call Graphs

* `find_all_ORFs_both_strands` -> `find_all_ORFs` -> `find_all_ORFs_one_frame` is a call graph
* A *static* call graph has arrows from function definitions to functions that are called within that definition
  * A recursive call is part of a circle (or "cycle").
  * Direct recursion is when a function contains a call to itself in its own body.
  * Indirect recursion is a cycle of functions A calls B calls C calls A.
* A *dynamic* call graph has arrows between function **invocations**.
  * A recursive function invokes itself, but with different parameters.
  * If it invokes itself with the same parameters, this will never stop -- infinite recursion, or stack overflow.
  * [This assumes *pure* functions. If the function consults a global variable or the state of the world, this could change, causing it to stop.]

## Normalizing

* We replaced a complicated comparison of two values $a$ and $b$ by a simple (Python `==`) comparison of the **normalized** values $a' = \textit{norm}(a)$ and $b' = \textit{norm}(b)$.
* Normalizing discards information we don't care about.
  * For example, in case-insensitive comparison, we can normalize two letters or strings by making them both all-uppercase (or all lowercase). This discards differences in case. If you think of a letter as being (letter of the alphabet, case), this squashes them all onto the same "case" axis.
  * Another example: in the anagram problem, we don't care about order, so a good normalization function discards the order, by moving everything to the same order. A convenient "same order" is alphabetical order, which `sorted` does.
* Normalizing simplfifies comparison by reducing n*n comparison (`a` to `a`, `a` to `A`, `A` to `a`, `A` to `A`) to one comparison (`A` to `A`).

## Unpacking

* A couple of times we "unpacked" a concise implementation in order to create an extension point. For example, we changed `for i in range` to `i = 0; while i < len` in order to create an extension point.
* We moved back and forth between modifying without extending, and just extending. For example, we changed `for i in range` to `i = 0; while i < len` in order to create an extension point without using that point, tested, used the extension point in order to implement new functionality, and tested again.
