{% include toc %}

## Code

The code from class, plus some elaborations, is [here]({% link _notebooks/is-triangle.md %}).

## Indices

| 0-based    | 1-based       |
|------------|---------------|
| Europe     | North America |
| Japan      | Russia        |
| Korea      |               |
| C/C++      | FORTRAN       |
| C#         | MATLAB        |
| Java       | Pascal        |
| JavaScript |               |
| LISP       |               |
| Python     |               |
| Scheme     |               |

* There's two uses of brackets
  * *Making* a list `[1, 4, 9]` is the list of three numbers `1`, then `4`, then `9`. The value begins with `[` and ends with `]`.
  * *Indexing* a list (or string): `s[1]` is the second element of `s`. The `[…]` follows another value.
  * The use of brackets to *index* a list is called subscripting. Python `s[1]` is equivalent to math $s_1$.

## Slices

* The **slice** `s[0:3]` is the first *three* items of a string (or list), not the first four. (E.g. if `s` is `Facebook`, `s[0:3]` is `Fac`, not `Face`.) It includes `s[0]`,`s[1]`, `s[2]`, but not `s[3]`.
* In math, the set of indices is a [half-open interval](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interval_(mathematics)#Notations_for_intervals): $[0, 3)$
* Convenient properties of half-open intervals:
  * The *sum* of two half-open intervals whose ends line up contains only one copy of each element. `s[0:3] + s[3:6] ==  s[0:6]` (`"Fac" + "ebo" == "Facebo"`). More generally, `s[i:j] + s[j:k] == s[i:k]`, for $i <= j <= k$.
  * The *length* of a slice is simply the difference between the endpoints: `len(s[3:6]) == 6 - 3`.
  * These properties are also commonly used in computation more generally. For example, in computing it is common for a rectangular region (10, 100) – (20, 200), with corners $(10, 100)$, $(20, 100)$, $(10, 200)$, $(20, 200)$, to be considered to include its edges that are contained in $x = 10$ and $y = 100$, but not $x = 100$ and $y = 200$, so that two abutting rectangles (10, 100) – (20, 200) and (20, 100) – (30, 200) to partition the plane into points in the first rectangle, points in the second rectangle, and points not in either rectangle, without any point being in both.

## Fencepost Error

* It takes 101 meter-long fenceposts to build a 100-meter fence
  * [Unless it's a rectangle or circle!  (Cf. [Kukelé's Dream](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/August_Kekulé#Kekul.C3.A9.27s_dream))]
* There's two floors, not three, between the first and third floor of a building.
* Getting this wrong is so common it even has a name: “fencepost error”
* When bugs have names, this is a clue that you're likely to run into them

## People

* Admiral Grace Hopper, created FORTRAN (the first programming language), taught at Smith College. Video: [How long is a nanosecond](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JEpsKnWZrJ8).
* John McCarthy, created LISP.
* Guy Steele, invented Scheme (a dialect of LISP, which inspired JavaScript); wrote *Growing a Language*
