---
typora-root-url: ..
---

{% include toc %}

## Specification and implementation

* The specification is what it does.
* The implementation is how it does it; in software, this is realized as code.
* Sometimes the specification is in your head.
* It can be useful to draw out the specification in order to check the implementation against it, without holding as much in your head.
* It can also be easier to compare the specification to the requirements, and then the implementation to the specification, than to compare the implementation directly against the requirements.
* A formal development methodology might include analysis -> requirements -> specification -> implementation. This is a modified [waterfall model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Waterfall_model), which is in turn a kind of “Big Design Up Front” (BDUF).
* Alternatives to BDUF include [exploratory programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exploratory_programming), [Iterative design](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iterative_design), and [incremental build](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Incremental_build_model) In all of these the process of building or using an incomplete implementation leads to new ideas about how to refine it. This ties into the “start small” bullet point from “Holding a Program in One's Head”.

## Who's reading your code?

* The computer (via the Python interpreter) reads your code in order to run or “execute”, or “evaluate” it), in order to produce behavior.
* Humans read your code in order to debug or extend it.
* One feedback loop is: coder -> code -> computer -> behavior -> coder (who compares the behavior to specification)
* Variable names, doc strings, comments are for humans.
* For a run-once program, writing for humans isn't important.
* For a long-lived source base, or one with several collaborators, a readable (by humans) code with some bugs can be more useful than an functionally correct but obfuscated program.
* Naming variables and functions:
  * Prefer longer names, the longer the distance between where a thing is defined and where it's used.
  * Where the code translates a domain such as math or physics, and the people working on the code understand this domain, it's common practice to use names from the domain, even if they're short.
  * Where the code implements a formula or algorithm, it's common practice to comment the source of the formula, and use the same names. In this case the formula is the specification, and using the same names makes it easier to see whether the implementation matches.
* Programming conventions don't make a difference to the computer, but make it easier for the human reader. For example, `import` statements go at the beginning of a file.

## Testing

* Testing is difficult because (among other reasons) you have to switch from “how can I make it work” to “how can I break it”.
* There's a convention for recording test examples into a doc string.
* doctest runs these examples
* `if __name__ == '__main__'` is an idiom (a kind of figure of speech) – you can use the whole without understanding how it's built from the parts. Cf. “Who let the cat out of the bag?”. (This is a better example than the one I used in class.)
* There's more about doctest in the reading journal and on the assignment page.
* The handout suggested creating the test cases without using a computer:
  * Breaking “coding” or “programming” into different activites can give you variety to switch between. (“My desert stomach isn't full.”)
  * Switching activities or media can give you a fresh perspective / allow you to slip into a different persona (writer vs. reader; builder vs. breaker)
* [`hello.py`](https://github.com/sd17fall/softdes.web/blob/master/files/day3/hello.py) is the final version of the code I typed in class

## Recognizing bugs

* Part of becoming proficient involves recognizing symptoms of failure, and associating them with causes.
* Analogy: recognize 56 as the result of 7 x 8. Now we know how to factor 56: we recognize “I've been here before; how did I get here?”
* Example: changed the code but the behavior didn't change -> didn't save the file. (See “autosave”, below.)
* Example: `NameError: name 'doctest' is not defined` -> forgotten `import`

## Atom tricks

* Enable autosave:
  * Use <kbd>Cmd+,</kbd> to open the Settings
  * Click on Packages in the sidebar
  * Find Autosave
  * Click Settings
  * Click Enabled
* [Multiple selection](http://flight-manual.atom.io/using-atom/sections/editing-and-deleting-text/#multiple-cursors-and-selections)

## Genetics

* DNA -> RNA -> nucleotides -> proteins. DNA and RNA are themselves proteins, and the machinery that implements the arrows is made of proteins. This is how DNA can code for organisms that copy themselves and transcribe the DNA.
* People mentioned:
  * Gregor Mendel (not "Mendelson") figured out that traits of an organism or inherited in a less linear way than just mixing their quantiities
  * [Rosalind Franklin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rosalind_Franklin) lead the work that provided the evidence for the structure of DNA; died too young to collect the Nobel prize.
  * Watson and Crick used this data to discover the structure of DNA.
  * Sydney Brenner figured out that nucleotide triples make codons.
* Genetics is another *domain* – that is built (partly) on strings, instead of numbers.
* Everything else covered in class is on the assignment page or pages it links to.

## Other

* Now we have four ways to run code: Jupyter, `python` prompt, Python Tutor web site, `python` + filename
* concept -> syntax -> action, vs. syntax -> action.
