{% include toc %}

Top answers from reading prompt:

| Already Doing     | Would Like        | Don't Believe In |
|-------------------|-------------------|------------------|
| Stretches         | Stretches         | Stretches        |
| Avoid distraction | Avoid distraction |                  |
| Work in groups    | Work in groups    |                  |

## Types

- Types are easier understood by example (extension) than definition (intension).
- Some types are integer, float, string, boolean; we haven't covered list, function.
- Some definitions of type are: a set of values; a category of values; how a value is stored; what you can do to a value.

## Coding, math, and domains

Programming isn't math, but it starts out very math-y

- Lots of programming is *about* something (a "domain"). All of you know some math, so we can use that as a domain.
- Lots of other domains include a component that's modeled with math. So learning how to code about math gives you tools for working in those domains.
- Programming was invented as part of math and split off, so lots of its basics are math-y.
- If you continue in *computer science* (FOCS, data structures and algorithms), you'll see more math. If you continue in *software engineering*, you'll see more principles that are more similar to other engineering disciplines.

## Git

- [TODO diagram from class]
- At this point, we're using git to distribute and collect assignments.
- Later, you'll use git to collaborate with each other.
- For where we are in the course, you don't need to understand git; you can type in the commands.
- It's acknowledged that this can be uncomfortable, so we're happy to teach you as much git as you have tolerance for.
- A repo lives on your laptop or in the cloud.
- A repo contains a set of files, and a set of commits. They cross-cut each other. [TODO picture from class]
- The files in a repo on your laptop relate to files that you can see on your disk. You can update one from the other.
- The repo on your notebook can know which other repos it's related to (where to pull changes from, and where to push them to).
- Git is complex.
  - Collaboration, versions, and synchronization are complex
  - The complexity can either go in a complex tool, or a complex workflow that uses a simper tool.
