---
categories: [protein synthesis, unit testing,
string formatting, studio time]
---

{% include toc %}

## Gene Finder guest presentation by Joanne Pratt

Joanne will walk students through how the Gene Finder mini-project
results in using the Blast search engine.

## Unit Testing questions

You are beginning to explore unit testing in class activities and in
the Gene Finder starter code. Now is a good time to ask questions
about their role in how you will design software.

1. In what ways, if any, have you found unit tests helpful so far?
2. What role does unit testing play in determining whether or not
your program is correct? (This may vary depending on the program.)
3. Any aspects of unit testing that you find unwieldy?
4. Do you have any best practices that you'd like to share
with the class from using unit tests?

## String Formatting

Today, you should practice the many ways that python supports formatting
and manipulating strings:

* Concatenation `+`
* Multiplication `*`
* Slicing `[]`
* String methods (e.g. `split`, `upper`)

```
>>> excited = "Software " + "Design" + "!"*10
>>> print(excited)
Software Design!!!!!!!!!!
>>> bored = excited.rstrip("!")
>>> print(bored)
Software Design
>>> print(bored[-6:])
Design
>>> print(bored.split())
['Software', 'Design']
```


Python also has several other built-in facilities for formatting strings.
Among other things, this makes it much easier to create things like a
square root table!

There are two main ways to format strings in Python, and you're likely to see
both in code you read.

The [older method](https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html#string-formatting) uses a format string and the percent character (same as the modulo
operator) to replace pieces of the format string. For example, to insert an
integer, you could use:


```
>>> print("Your number is %d" % 52)
Your number is 52
```


The [newer method](https://docs.python.org/3/library/string.html#format-string-syntax) also uses a (similar) format string, but uses an explicit
format method:

```
>>> print("Your number is {:d}".format(52))
Your number is 52
```


The newer method can have a bit more complex syntax, but is
often clearer and can be more powerful.

The documentation for each can be a bit dense, but fortunately there is a
great cheat sheet with useful tasks at <https://pyformat.info>


**Exercise: cheap is 33 dollars; free is 34!**


You walk into a store where each item is priced according to the letters in
its name: 'a' costs 1 dollar, 'b' costs 2, and so on. Write a program that prints a
receipt for this wacky store:

```
bananas $52
rice $35
paprika $72
potato chips $78
------------------------

Total $237
```

What helper functions would be useful in creating this receipt program?

Hint: the [built-in 'ord' and
'chr'](https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html) functions may be
useful. If you use these, pay attention to how case affects the result.


## Open studio time

Please use instructors and NINJAs in the studio for questions and approaches
as you work in MP1.
