---
categories: ['README', 'code review framing']
---

{% include toc %}

## For Next Time

* Read Think Python Appendix A to prepare for a conversation on debugging
* Add README to your project repository, update your architecture diagram
* Submit [Code Review framing survey](https://goo.gl/forms/LQucKLrbyZOV3BEp2) today (instructions below)


## READMEs and Documentation


## Code Reviews

For some motivation from all of our favorite site, please check out this quote from Jeff Atwood.

> I believe that peer code reviews are the single biggest thing you can do to improve your code.
>
>         – Jeff Atwood, Co-Founder of Stack Overflow
>           (source: http://blog.codinghorror.com/code-reviews-just-do-it/)

Code reviews are widely utilized in industry as a means to improve code quality.  Often, code reviews will be required before finalizing any contributions to a software repository.  For instance, a very common workflow for code reviews is to use Git branches for feature development, which are merged into the master branch only after detailed comments are provided and any issues are resolved.  There are lots of good resources on code reviews (for instance, check out the link in the Jeff Atwood quote or [a discussion of using code reviews with a team of sys admins](http://willthames.github.io/2016/11/07/intro-to-code-reviews.html)).

For next class, we, the instructors, will be doing a review of your team's code.  The purpose of this review is a bit different than the code reviews described above, in that we are not seeking to find every last tiny error in the code.  Rather, we will focus on providing course corrections and high-level feedback that can help you shape your work over the final weeks of the project.  As such, we'd like you to engage with the following steps to frame your code review.

1.  *Make sure your code is in reasonable shape.*  For instance, remove dead code (e.g., files or functions are no longer utilized), make sure your documentation is in decent, and add relevant info to your README file.

2.  *Point us in the right direction.*  We have created a [Google form](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSf0-J_2KiffRMKniLdrqjQiJOTaHzZ4AcLW_2ClN737GVJEew/viewform) that you should use to allow us to give you the most useful feedback possible.  Please take a look at the survey so that you have a sense of what information we are asking for.<br/><br/>Some ideas for choosing code sections: code that you have questions about; code that you want to show off; code that you suspect may be fragile or buggy; code that is particularly complicated. Assure that each code section has sufficient documentation for a reviewer to figure out when it's called, what it does, and how it does it.


### How to link to a section of code in GitHub
