---
categories: [Classes, MP2 revision]
---

{% include toc %}

## Today

* Complete [Reflection and Teaming Survey 2](https://goo.gl/forms/C5Lv97hbB5s5SfXW2)
* Reading Journal Debrief
* Class practice: MP2 revision
* For next time: meet in auditorium for MP4 kickoff


## Reading Journal Debrief

### Bad Kangaroos

In this Reading Journal we looked at a very common error that can be very frustrating to debug:

```python
class Kangaroo:
    def __init__(self, name, contents=[]):	# Warning: mutable default argument bug!
        self.pouch_contents = contents
```

The core "[gotcha](http://docs.python-guide.org/en/latest/writing/gotchas/#mutable-default-arguments)" here is that default argument values are evaluated *once* when the function is defined, not every time it is called.

In this case, it means that the new list is created one time, and each new `Kangaroo` instance (that did not provide contents to override the default) has a reference to the same list.

This would be true of any mutable object as a default argument, not just `list` (e.g. `dict`, your custom classes). Here is another implementation, showing a Python idiom commonly used to avoid this bug:

```python
class Kangaroo:
    def __init__(self, name, contents=None):
        if contents == None:
            contents = []
        self.pouch_contents = contents
```

Here we've used `None` (immutable) as a stand-in for the case when no contents have been passed and we should create an empty list. The new list is created inside the body of the `__init__` method when it is called, so each `Kangaroo` instance gets its own empty list vs a shared reference.

General advice: avoid using mutable objects as default values of function arguments.

----

## Agenda: sorting objects

For this Reading Journal, you had to implement a `print_agenda` method that prints `Events` in chronological order.
The key challenge here was sorting the `Event`s: Python provides many
[techniques for sorting](https://docs.python.org/3.6/howto/sorting.html),
but they don't know how to sensibly sort your custom objects without some help from you.

Let's say that you have a list of `Event`s. The first design choice to make is whether you should sort that list on demand (e.g. whenever `print_agenda` is called) or maintain the list in sorted order all time.


```python
class Time:
    def __init__(self, hour=0, minute=0, second=0):
        self.hour = hour
        self.minute = minute
        self.second = second

    def to_int(self):
        return 60*(60*time.hour + time.minute) + time.second
```

Sort on demand or maintain sorted.


implement [\_\_lt\_\_](https://docs.python.org/3.6/reference/datamodel.html#object.__lt__) method for the class, so that `time1 < time2' works

----

### Agenda: str vs repr

Several of you ran into interesting behavior when trying to print your custom classes.

[\_\_repr\_\_](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#object.__repr__)
[\_\_str\_\_](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#object.__str__)


----

## Exercise: rewrite MP2 using classes

Now that we've learned about writing custom classes, let's circle back and revise your work from MP2 to use what you've learned over the past two reading journals.

As you should recall, in MP2 we used the built-in Python data type `list` as a means to represent a nested function.  For instance, the function $$f(x, y) = \sin(\pi x) \cos(\pi x)$$ would be represented as as the following list.

```python
["prod", ["sin_pi", ["x"]], ["cos_pi", ["x"]]]
```

While we were able to get by with this representation, it was not the most elegant way to represent a nested function.  We can use classes to provide a much more versatile and clean implementation of nested functions. Further, there were other operations that our program did (e.g., remapping intervals, generating random functions), that could be improved using classes.

### Propose a new design

With two of your classmates, grab some whiteboard (or chalkboard) space.  Come up with an object-oriented design (i.e. some classes and the methods that they will provide) to re-implement [the second mini-project](/assignments/mini-project-2-computational-art).  Be prepared to answer the following questions regarding your design.
* How does your design support code readability?
* How does your design support code flexibility / extensibility (the ability to make modifications, e.g., in response to new requirements)?
* How does your design support modularity (the ability to decompose various elements of your program into separate interchangeable components)?

We'll take some time to hear from various groups to get a sense of the design choices that you all are making.

### Revise your design (optional)

If you'd like, you can change your design based on what you've heard from your peers.

### Implement your design

Start an implementation of your design.  You probably won't be able to get through all of it during class, but try to complete a few methods and provide method stubs (e.g., methods that just contain a `pass` statement) for all of your classes.

### Additional stuff you might work on during this time

We're also available for conversation about issues that arose using classes in the last reading journals and `geometry.py`


## Diversion: git branch

TODO: Finish explanation

```
# Create a new branch to work on
$ git checkout -b ClassRewrite

# Do your work, make commits to the new branch without affecting master

# Optional: push your branch with work to GitHub
$ git push -u origin ClassRewrite

# Switch back to master branch
$ git checkout master

# You'll see your work disappear from the local directory but it's not gone! Just checkout ClassRewrite branch to see it again.
```

To see this visually, work through the first three levels of "[Learn Git Branching](https://learngitbranching.js.org/)"
