---
categories: [protein synthesis, unit testing, studio time]
---

{% include toc %}

## String Formatting

Today, you should practice the many ways that python supports formatting
and manipulating strings:

* Concatenation `+`
* Multiplication `*`
* Slicing `[]`
* String methods (e.g. `split`, `upper`)

```
>>> excited = "Software " + "Design" + "!"*10
>>> print(excited)
Software Design!!!!!!!!!!
>>> bored = excited.rstrip("!")
>>> print(bored)
Software Design
>>> print(bored[-6:])
Design
>>> print(bored.split())
['Software', 'Design']
```


Python also has several other built-in facilities for formatting strings.
Among other things, this makes it much easier to create things like a
square root table!

There are two main ways to format strings in Python, and you're likely to see
both in code you read.

The [older method](https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html#string-formatting) uses a format string and the percent character (same as the modulo
operator) to replace pieces of the format string. For example, to insert an
integer, you could use:


```
>>> print("Your number is %d" % 52)
Your number is 52
```


The [newer method](https://docs.python.org/3/library/string.html#format-string-syntax) also uses a (similar) format string, but uses an explicit
format method:

```
>>> print("Your number is {:d}".format(52))
Your number is 52
```


The newer method can have a bit more complex syntax, but is
often clearer and can be more powerful.

The documentation for each can be a bit dense, but fortunately there is a
great cheat sheet with useful tasks at <https://pyformat.info>


**Exercise: cheap is 33 dollars; free is 34!**


You walk into a store where each item is priced according to the letters in
its name: 'a' costs 1 dollar, 'b' costs 2, and so on. Write a program that prints a
receipt for this wacky store:

```
bananas $52
rice $35
paprika $72
potato chips $78
------------------------

Total $237
```

What helper functions would be useful in creating this receipt program?

Hint: the [built-in 'ord' and
'chr'](https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html) functions may be
useful. If you use these, pay attention to how case affects the result.
